---
title: "Where did it go - Tom Ray Live Stream Solo Performance"
date: 2020-10-05 00:00:00 
permalink: /2020/10/where-did-it-go-tom-ray-live-stream.html
thumbnail: https://img.youtube.com/vi/wb-qDJuR2qU/hqdefault.jpg
excerpt: "Where did it go - Lorenzo's Music Tom Ray live solo performance"
tags: ["rom-comm mixtape", "video", "Where did it go", "live-video"]
---

{% include video-embed.html video_id="wb-qDJuR2qU" title="Where did it go - Tom Ray Live Stream Solo Performance" %}<p>This clip is from a full live stream performance I did on our <a href="https://youtu.be/dxdaqD6PQzAe" rel="nofollow" target="_blank">YouTube channel</a>.&nbsp;</p><p>There are a couple weird things about this song called "Where did it go" from our release <a href="https://www.lorenzosmusic.com/2018/08/rom-comm-mixtape.html">Rom-Comm Mixtape</a>.&nbsp;</p><p>I have a sample in it that is a <b>cricket sound</b>. And the cricket actually keeps the tempo with a lot of parts in it. It comes in and out as the song goes on.&nbsp;</p><p>But when we did the song live I didn't have a way to use a cricket sample for it when we played. We tried so many different things and then the closest I could come to is this set of wooden sticks because it was the same tone as the cricket. so I started using those when we played live.&nbsp;</p><p>The other weird thing about the song is the lyrics were written while I was riding my bike. There's an interesting story behind this.&nbsp;</p><p>There's a line in the song that goes:</p><p><b>"<i>concentrating hard like a little girl smoking for the first time</i>"&nbsp;</b></p><p>And it was because as I was riding my bike one day there were these two girls that were sitting by this stop sign near a park on a street corner.&nbsp;</p><p>They were probably in their early teens and as they were sitting there they were clearly trying cigarettes for the first time. I saw them doing it it was so obvious I could tell just by looking at them that's what they were doing. they were looking around seeing if anybody was there.&nbsp;</p><p>first of all, hide if you're worried about getting caught smoking don't sit on the corner at a stop sign. I thought that was funny.&nbsp;</p><p>But all of it just reminded me of trying things like that for the first time and not being able to relive those moments.&nbsp;</p><p>So while I was biking I had the microphone on my headphones connected to my phone I was coming up with the lyrics as I continued to ride recording it to my phone.&nbsp;</p><p>And that was the one line that I had and kind of based the rest on that. The whole thing is about stuff that you experience and you don't appreciate it until later on.</p><p>You can view the whole live stream performance on YouTube <a href="https://youtu.be/dxdaqD6PQzAe" rel="nofollow" target="_blank">https://youtu.be/dxdaqD6PQzAe</a></p><p>- Tom</p>