---
title: "Louis Lingg and the Bombs - Anarchy and Pop Punk - Lorenzo's Music Podcast"
date: 2024-01-26 00:00:00 
permalink: /2024/01/louis-lingg-and-bombs-anarchy-and-pop-punk.html
thumbnail: https://img.youtube.com/vi/ZNMUwyCiyg0/hqdefault.jpg
excerpt: "On our podcast, I talk with Josh of the band Louis Lingg and the Bombs"
tags: ["Louis Lingg and the Bombs", "podcast", "lorenzos-music-podcast"]
---

{% include video-embed.html video_id="ZNMUwyCiyg0" title="Louis Lingg and the Bombs - Anarchy and Pop Punk - Lorenzo's Music Podcast" %}<b>Listen to the show on:</b> <a href="https://open.spotify.com/show/41teUSf34DaUAW4Ukk2J7L" rel="nofollow" target="_blank">Spotify</a> | <a href="https://itunes.apple.com/us/podcast/lorenzos-music-podcast/id1441923662?mt=2&amp;app=podcast&amp;at=11lMBQ&amp;ct=yeabig" rel="nofollow" target="_blank">Apple Podcasts</a> | <a href="https://music.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLbvJrJ34c9MmVSGE4nMSU_KXCR5Bgm-P6" rel="nofollow" target="_blank">YouTube Podcasts</a> | <a href="https://anchor.fm/s/7a0e054/podcast/rss" rel="nofollow" target="_blank">RSS</a><p>Are you ready to delve into the high-energy world of punk rock? On this podcast, I interview Josh, the frontman of the anarchist pop punk band, Louis Lingg and the Bombs.<span></span></p><!--more--><p></p><p>This episode takes us on a journey from the vibrant streets of Paris to the global stage, where the band has been making waves with their unique sound and unapologetic message.</p><p>Josh's story is one of serendipity, passion, and a touch of chaos. From a chance move to France prompted by a forgotten promise to his then-girlfriend, to forming a band, every twist and turn is as unexpected as their music.&nbsp;</p><p>Louis Lingg and the Bombs have carved out a niche in the music industry by blending the raw energy of punk with the catchy hooks of pop, all while staying true to their anarchist roots. Their approach to music is refreshingly authentic, choosing to play impromptu gigs in underground squats, proving that sometimes the best way to connect with an audience is through sheer, unfiltered performance.</p><p>The podcast episode is not just a tale of musical rebellion; it's a masterclass in DIY ethos. Josh shares the band's experience of building their own recording studio from scratch, a testament to their dedication and ingenuity. The result? A space where creativity knows no bounds, and where their latest album, "&gt;_​.​.​.​checking system​.​.​.​disruption detected​.​.​." was born.</p><p>Get a sneak peek into the band's upcoming projects, including a new EP and Josh's solo venture. With a story that's as compelling as their music.</p><p>Check out Louis Lingg and the Bombs on Bandcamp -&nbsp;<a href="https://louislinggandthebombs.bandcamp.com" rel="nofollow" target="_blank">https://louislinggandthebombs.bandcamp.com</a></p><p><br /></p>